[Proposal] Generalize `conformance` macros as `extension` macros. (#2090)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-extension-macros.md

# Generalize `conformance` macros as `extension` macros

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-extension-macros.md)
* Authors: [Holly Borla](https://github.com/hborla)
* Review Manager: [John McCall](https://github.com/rjmccall)
* Status: **Awaiting implementation**
* Implementation: [apple/swift#66967](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/66967), [apple/swift-syntax#1859](https://github.com/apple/swift-syntax/pull/1859)
* Review: ([pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-generalize-conformance-macros-as-extension-macros/65653))

## Introduction

This proposal generalizes the `conformance` macro role as an `extension` macro role that can add a member list to an extension in addition to a protocol and `where` clause.

## Motivation

[SE-0389: Attached Macros](0389-attached-macros.md) introduced conformance macros, which expand to a conformance with a `where` clause written in an extension on the type the macro is attached to:

```swift
@attached(conformance)
macro AddEquatable() = #externalMacro(...)

@AddEquatable
struct S {}

// expands to
extension S: Equatable {}
```

> However, the `conformance` macro role is extremely limited on its own. They _only_ have the ability to return a protocol name and the syntax for a `where` clause. If the protocol conformance requires members -- as most protocol conformances do -- those must be added through a separate `member` macro role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the `conformance` macro role is extremely limited on its own. A conformance macro _only_ has the ability to return a protocol name and the syntax for a `where` clause. If the protocol conformance requires members --- as most protocol conformances do --- those must be added through a separate `member` macro role.
```

More importantly, conformance macros are the only way for a macro to expand to an extension on the annotated type. The inability to add members in an extension of a type rather than the primary declaration is a serious limitation of the macro system, because extensions have several important semantic implications, including (but not limited to):

* Protocols can only provide default implementations of requirements in extensions
* Initializers added in an extension of a type do not suppress the compiler-synthesized initializers
* Computed properties and methods in protocol and class extensions do not participate in dynamic dispatch

Extensions also have stylistic benefits. Code inside an extension will share the generic requirements on the extension itself rather than repeating the generic requirement on every method, and implementing conformance requirements in an extension is a common practice in Swift.

## Proposed solution

> This proposal removes the `conformance` macro role in favor or an `extension` macro role. An `extension` macro role can be used with the `@attached` macro attribute, and it can add a conformance, a where clause, and a member list in an extension on the type the macro is attached to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal removes the `conformance` macro role in favor of an `extension` macro role. An `extension` macro role can be used with the `@attached` macro attribute, and it can add a conformance, a `where` clause, and a member list in an extension on the type the macro is attached to:
```

## Detailed design

### Specifying macro-introduced protocol conformances

SE-0389 states that whenever a macro produces declarations that are visible to other Swift code, it is required to declare the names in advance. This rule also applies to extension macros, which must specify:

* Declarations inside the extension, which can be specified using `named`, `prefixed`, `suffixed`, and `arbitrary`.
* The names of protocols that are listed in the extension's conformance clause.

It is an error for a macro to add a conformance or an extension member that is not covered by the `@attached(extension)` attribute.

### Extension macros applied to nested types

Extensions are only valid at the top-level. When an extension macro is applied to a nested type:

```swift
@attached(extension, conformances: MyProtocol, names: named(requirement))
macro MyProtocol = #externalMacro(...)

struct Outer {
  @MyProtocol
  struct Inner {}
}
```

The macro expansion containing the extension is inserted at the top-level. The above code expands to:

```swift
struct Outer {
  struct Inner {}
}

extension Outer.Inner: MyProtocol {
  func requirement() { ... }
}
```

> It is an error to apply an extension macro to a local type, because there is no way to write an extension on a local type in Swift:

Reviewer: Should we mention that this is a future direction?

```swift
func test() {
  @MyProtocol // error
  struct LocalType {}
}
```

### Implementing extension macros

Extension macro implementations should conform to the `ExtensionMacro` protocol:

```swift
/// Describes a macro that can add extensions of the declaration it's
/// attached to.
public protocol ExtensionMacro: AttachedMacro {
  /// Expand an attached extension macro to produce the contents that will 
  /// create a set of extensions.
  ///
  /// - Parameters:
  ///   - node: The custom attribute describing the attached macro.
  ///   - declaration: The declaration the macro attribute is attached to.
  ///   - type: The type to provide extensions of.
  ///   - context: The context in which to perform the macro expansion.
  ///
  /// - Returns: the set of extensions declarations introduced by the macro,
  ///   which are always inserted at top-level scope. Each extension must extend
  ///   the `type` parameter.
  static func expansion(
    of node: AttributeSyntax,
    attachedTo declaration: some DeclGroupSyntax,

>     providingExtensionsOf type: some TypeSyntaxProtocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    providingExtensionsOf type: some TypeSyntaxProtocol,
```

* The names of protocols that are listed in the extension's conformance clause. These protocols are specified in the `conformances:` list of the `@attached(conformances:)` attribute. Each name that appears in this list must be a conformance constraint, where a conformance constraint is one of:
  * A protocol name
  * A typealias whose underlying type is a conformance constraint
  * A protocol composition whose entires are each a conformance constraint

The following restrictions apply to generated conformances and names listed in `@attached(extension)`:

* An extension macro cannot add a conformance to a protocol that is not covered by the `conformances:` list in `@attached(extension, conformnaces:)`.
* An extension macro cannot add a member that is not covered by the `names:` list in `@attached(extension, names:)`.
* An extension macro cannot introduce an extension with an attached `peer` macro, because the peer-macro-generated names are not covered by the original `@attached(extension)` attribute.

### Extension macro application

Extension macros can only be attached to the primary declaration of a nominal type; they cannot be attached to typealias or extension declarations.

> Extensions are only valid at the top-level. When an extension macro is applied to a nested type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swift only allows `extension` declarations at the top level in a file. Despite this, extension macros can be applied to a nested type:
```

```swift
@attached(extension, conformances: MyProtocol, names: named(requirement))
macro MyProtocol = #externalMacro(...)

struct Outer {
  @MyProtocol
  struct Inner {}
}
```

> The macro expansion containing the extension is inserted at the top-level. The above code expands to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this situation, the macro expansion containing the `extension` is inserted at the top level of the file, instead of immediately where the macro is invoked, where the `extension` would be invalid. The above code expands to:
```
